---
title: ghar (times third)
excerpt: "spring break-induced introspections on home and family"
date: 2023-04-06
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - freshman
  - family
  - serious
  - bombers
---

this week, spring break, even though i'd traveled thousands of miles to come back to be with my parents -- the people who've given me the most in this world -- there were a number of times where i wanted to be back on floor at MIT. i felt really shitty about it, because i love being home and i couldn't understand why i'd want to be anywhere else, especially when i haven't seen my family in so long. but i did nevertheless.

for a while now, i've felt like my subconscious is telling me that i think of burton third as home too. sometimes when i call my parents during the school year, i even call burton third "home" in front of them. i always feel a twang of pain because i don't want them to think i think of home or them any less now that i'm in college, and i correct myself to say "dorm." i never let myself accept what my subconscious kept bubbling up.

<p align="center">

***

</p>

growing up, in an attempt to integrate my brother and i with our culture and heritage, my parents tried to bring us back to india as much as possible. during these trips, we'd always at least visit my grandparents and stay with them. i remember the first time we went, my grandpa walked my brother and i to my dad's old room, which he had repainted and decorated for us. i felt so loved -- my grandparents had made a permanent space for us in their place. on a later trip, playing with my brother on the open marble floors, i remember telling my grandma _mujhe aapka ghar bahut pasand hain_. "i love your house." but instead of smiling at (what i thought was) a compliment, my grandma's faced turned upside down. she instead said, _aise math bolo -- ye aapka bhi ghar hain_. "don't say that -- this is your home too." i quickly corrected myself, but i didn't actually believe what she'd said. i understood my grandma's sentiment -- it's the same as in the common american request to "make yourself at home!" -- but her genuine belief that their house was mine too was foreign to me. whenever she and my grandpa visited america, we lived as one big family together, but i still viewed our house as distinctly theirs and their house in india as distinctly theirs.

today, i still refer to the house in india as "our house." but now when i say it, it isn't just to appease my grandma; it's what i truly believe. the house in india has supplied some of my fondest memories of childhood and whenever we visit india, no place puts me 100% at ease until i've reached my grandparents' place. i breathe in the familiar smell, nap on the same couch i did when i was young (although now it's much too small for me now), and stare up at the same hand-painted constellations on my bedroom walls. but it's not just a sense of nostalgia that makes me call it home. coming back after my grandfather passed away, things about living there had changed, but it was home all the same. and, there are a number of other places i've visited a bunch and had countless positive and formative memories, but none of them make me feel at home the same way. there's something special about the people that made the india ghar (house) into _ghar_ (home)[^1].

<p align="center">

***

</p>

now i realize that i've had multiple homes since childhood. dallas and india and cambridge can all feel like _ghar_ to me -- it doesn't make any one of them matter less. after all, my grandparents' house never made me love my parents' any less. they say "home is where the heart is" -- but who says your heart has to be all in one place? my three (third) homes are all entirely different. i can't have ice or cold water in india. i'm never woken up by people screaming down the hallway at 2 AM in dallas. and there's no late-night drives for falooda and paan at mit. the lesson of indian/hindu culture's collectivism is that all of these places and all of these people are mine -- i live both with and without them at all times, some quantum superposition that gives me power than any classical computer could harness.


[^1]: "house" and "home" are both "ghar" in hindi. (okay this isn't like technically true, there are some words for just house, like "makaan" but i feel like "ghar" is the most common. regardless, some linguistic manipulation for the literary effect is okay).

